[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Every so often a paradigm
shift happens that completely
changes the way we live.
Agricultural advancements
catapulted us out
of the hunter-gatherer
age to agrarian societies.
The invention of the
Gutenberg press in 1440
expanded awareness
through literacy
and ultimately interrupted the
power of religious authorities.
The internet has shrunk
distances around the world
by connecting
people and cultures
in the flash of a keystroke.
We are all connected.
Now, there's a growing shift
in how we think about health.
That shift is an awareness of
the wisdom of natural healing
and the interconnectedness
of all life.
Real immunity is
the intelligence
ingrained in each of our cells.
It's our birthright.
>> So I've been on a quest
for about six decades,
and I'm really fortunate to
approach the topic of real
immunity from a number of
different vantage points.
As a child, I watched
my own mother die,
and I saw the contrast
between natural medicine
and conventional practices.
Then, as a young
mother, I struggled
to help my own children through
asthma, migraines, kidney
reflux, vaccine injuries.
And then I bumped into a
pediatrician who wisely
directed me to try homeopathy.
Homeopathy worked so
beautifully with my children
that, soon, I found
myself embarking on four
years of homeopathic school.
And there, I discovered the
principle of like curing like
and the miraculous properties
of the vital force.
So now as a clinical
practitioner of homeopathy,
I meet with families all the
time and hear their concerns.
These families are
so gripped with fear
and they're cast adrift amongst
so many conflicting opinions.
They're losing their inner
compass and their direction
and ability to navigate.
There are so many people
looking for answers
and there's a lot of
pieces to the puzzle.
The quest for real
immunity looks at immunity
from a completely
fresh perspective.
We need to know what
is real immunity,
how can we lose
the fear, and who
are the experts
who are exploring
safe, nontoxic methods,
sustainable ways for better
health?
Because immunity is
not just delivered
by the end of a
needle or with a pill.
Real immunity encompasses
all parts of ourselves,
mental, physical,
emotional, even spiritual.
And it continues to develop
throughout our entire lives.
So join me now on a
quest for real immunity.
>> You know, in chiropractic,
we talk about the doctor within,
the wisdom within, that innate
intelligence within our body
that takes two cells and
brings them together.
And how many days
later is a baby,
a live, living, breathing baby.
And it wasn't done by any
outside, educated knowledge.
It was done by that innate
intelligence within all of us.
That's the magic of life
that we need to focus more on
and realize, I have
a cut and it heals.
My body knows what it's doing.
I come in touch
with an organism,
my body is perfectly
designed, my immune system,
to do a dance with
that organism,
and to be able to learn from
the presence of that organism
and strengthen my immune system.
To define healing,
healing is a process.
A lot of people think, oh, I'm
healthy if I have no symptoms.
I'm healthy if I just feel good.
And what we, again, have
gotten estranged from
is that when you're
in the body, you feel.
Sometimes pain,
sometimes pleasure.
And that's the experience
of being in the body.
So we've gotten into this
model in our society.
Oh, if there's pain,
I can't have that.
I have no time for that.
I don't want that, it hurts.
So we want to suppress it,
and the suppression of it
is very often impeding the
actual healing process.
>> Well, first of all, the
science is not settled when it
comes to almost anything.
And so I think we
empower ourselves,
we empower the
parents, to just be
open to learning new
information, and information
that, perhaps, you haven't
heard before from traditionally
trained MDs that is
important to know.
And so when you start
looking, you start learning.
And I think there is a tipping
point in anybody's journey
where once you know something,
you can't unknow it.
Physicians underestimate
themselves, I think,
when they aren't aware
of the impact they're
having on their patients.
You know, our
patients come to us,
and they are looking
to us for guidance.
But they're also looking for
us to meet them where they are.
And, too often, I
think doctors today
are, sort of, following
protocols and repeating--
perhaps, there's
a group of studies
that make them
think a certain way,
and they're just spouting
off these things.
So the question is, why am
I able to change and admit
that I've made a
mistake or change lanes
and do something different, in
comparison to most of my peers
who have a hard time with that?
I really think it goes
back to my childhood.
I grew up as a
missionary kid in Africa.
We were in Zimbabwe.
It was Rhodesia back then.
Rhodesia was like apartheid.
It wasn't exactly, but
it was pretty close.
The whites had all the power.
They had all the benefits.
There were white toilets, white
swimming pool, white trains.
Well, I grew up in a
village with the Africans,
so I related to them I was
like, well, wait a minute.
Why are we oppressed?
And so I got a living
example of oppression,
and the fact that,
really, when there
are powerful, powerful
interests that
are wanting to maintain the
status quo, you have to resist.
It won't change if there's
not a resistance to that.
And so I had examples, like
in fifth or sixth grade,
I was the head boy,
so I was in charge
of all the upperclassmen.
And I had to raise the Rhodesian
flag on Independence Day.
And I refused to do it.
I said, this is an
illegal government.
Well, that was,
like, ridiculous.
No head boy had ever refused
to raise a flag, right?
I actually asked my
mom recently, I said,
did really do that
all on my own?
You guys must have
put me up to it.
I mean, what was I?
12 years old, right?
She said, oh, no.
That was your idea.
You forget, you sat
in our living room
and had tea with the likes
of Bishop Mussarela, who
became the first African
president of the country,
with multiple major
African leaders,
and we were talking revolution.
It was a part of our being
to resist oppression.
So that was my background.
>> In peaceful ways, we
can make profound change.
I grew up in the 60s
when civil disobedience
was how we got things done.
There were lunch counter
sit-ins and Rosa Parks.
We all have intuition
and the intuitive urge
to speak up when
something isn't right.
When Rosa quietly took
her seat on that bus,
she made a permanent
impact on our society.
The seeds of civil
disobedience were sown in Paul
at a very young age.
His experiences in
Africa helped shape him
into who he is today, one of the
leading voices for children's
health and vaccine safety, a
pediatrician who speaks up,
not because it's
easy but because he
knows there's a better way.
>> How many times do you hear
a story that a mother was
at a doctor or somewhere
and somebody said, oh,
you got to do this.
And she goes, it just
didn't feel right.
But they know,
they're the authority.
They're the ones
who know, right?
And we have allowed
ourselves to give up
our power outside of ourselves.
When we do that, we
disconnect ourself
from our inner
intelligence that knows
what we need at any given time.
And moms, that baby
was inside you.
It grew inside you.
We know now,
neurology is showing
us the communication between
the mother and the baby
when the baby's in there.
There is a connection made
that is unbroken forever,
for life, and honor that.
You have to get out of the
mental clatter and clutter,
and you have to go deeper.
It doesn't mean you
don't educate yourself.
Find out information.
Deep breath.
Go deeper.
Let me bounce that
off of trusting people
that are coming from
the same place as me.
>> One thing I say to
mothers, in particular,
is you must trust
your instincts.
We are here on this Earth now,
not because of public health,
or medicine, or
antibiotics, or vaccines,
but because of
maternal instinct.
That is the most powerful
force in the world
that mothers know when
their children are well
or they're ill.
They know how to rear them.
They have an instinct, and that
instinct is that little voice,
and it's there therefore
a very, very good reason.
It's there because it is
our principal mechanism
of survival.
And if we ignore
it, then we ignore
millions of years of evolution.
And parents need,
mothers in particular,
need to recognize the power
and the reason for that voice
being there and to trust it.
And when something doesn't
feel right to mothers,
they should defer to that voice,
not the man in the white coat,
not to anyone else.
And that's the beginning.
Then they need to get educated.
Then they need to take
that voice forward.
They need to begin to
understand the arguments.
>> So fevers are one of
my most favorite things.
Years ago, in one of the very
first lectures I ever gave,
I'll never forget, I had a
whole room full of people.
And I went through my natural
diet, and natural healing
and natural home.
And then we get
to the fever part,
and I said, just let
your kids have a fever.
You know, when little
kids are little,
they're going to
have high fevers.
As long as the fever is under
106, it's a healing fever.
The body works optimally
between 103 and 105
to kill bacteria, in particular.
So and if a fever runs
that high in a child,
it generally doesn't
run more than 72 hours.
But that fever spikes
the immune system in
such a dramatic, profound way
to go in and really preserve
its being.
So it's an amazing process.
You know, you have
to remember that it's
all normal, biologic process,
and it can be really scary.
And so, you know,
in my practice,
I've been in
practice 12 years, I
get a lot of calls
for high fevers.
I always pick up those
calls, and I never
begrudge a parent for
calling me who's afraid.
And, you know, I've done
this long enough now
that when parents
call me, I can almost
see the difference
between a viral fever
and a bacterial fever,
and I can give advice
innately about those different
processes for those families.
But once those parents get
through that three days,
or however long, five
days if it's roseola.
Once they get through
that, and they
know that they've
trusted the body
and they've trusted
the process, they
come out looking like
they've walked on fire.
>> So we know that children
need to have fevers.
They need to have
these childhood
illnesses and, historically,
that's always been available
through diseases like
roseola, and chickenpox,
and measles, and mumps.
And they provide a
type of gut reset
for the child, a nice, high
metabolic fever in their gut
to clear anything that's
been sitting there.
So any residual,
undigested proteins,
or viruses, or
foods, or emotions.
It kind of gives a gut reset.
After the child has these
fevers, these really good
childhood illnesses, they are
often working through something
that they're working on.
>> This is beautiful
homeopathic thinking.
When your child is
sick, the vital force
is asking you to slow
down, be in the moment,
and make meaningful
contact with your child
instead of rushing to eliminate
the symptoms out of fear.
There's no need to fear.
Illness is a natural
part of maturation.
>> For instance, with
roseola, it's around the time
the child's crawling.
OK?
So the child's trying to
develop this new motor skill.
They get the roseola,
and after they
recover from their
illness, they're crawling.
We see similar things with
chickenpox and crossing
the midline.
We see similar
things with measles
and learning how to read.
So it's interesting,
we don't have
these diseases anymore of
childhood, for the most part.
And we're seeing an increase
in problems with, you know,
children don't crawl.
They're having difficulty
crossing the midline.
They're not integrating
their infant reflexes
and they're dyslexic.
>> That process of getting
sick and getting better is what
exercises our immune system.
We've been led to believe
that never having symptoms
and never being sick
is the desired goal.
Nothing could be more erroneous.
It's the act of the
immune system mounting
an appropriate response
that strengthens and matures
our real immunity.
>> The common idea about fevers
is that we should be fighting
them.
That's the common
idea today, and that's
the message given
by the doctors,
you know, to give alternating
Tylenol and Ibuprofen
for fevers that
come through when
they reach a certain point.
There's this certain number
that doctors talk about.
And the thing that we don't
understand about fevers
is that the number
that we take, via
under the tongue, or
the armpit, or a scan,
is a peripheral fever.
It's not measuring
the fever internally,
so we're treating a symptom.
We're treating a process
that's moving through and out
of the body and expecting
that treatment to affect
the whole of the body.
We talked about when something
comes in through the body
to keep in flow.
When we give Tylenol, it
actually stops the fever.
When we give anti diarrheal
medicines, anti nausea
medicines, when we give any
of these things that suppress
the flow of the
body, it actually
drives the illness in deeper.
>> So real immunity is
really one of my passions
to communicate, because real
immunity starts far before we
actually breathe
our first breath.
You know, our
immune system really
begins to develop around week
14 of gestation, week 14.
So immunity starts to develop
as these cells leave the thymus
and start to differentiate
in the circulatory system
of the baby, around
week 14 of gestation.
And then we get another
immunological hit,
quote unquote, during
birth, as the baby travels
through the birth canal.
Because the bacteria that
is lined on the birth
canal sets the baby's
immune system up
to be able to fight normal
bacteria and viruses
that they would be
exposed to in their life.
Without that exposure,
we're seeing,
by loads of clinical
research, that those children
are genetically predisposed to
certain genes are flipped on
or flipped off,
and those children
are predisposed to asthma,
allergies, and, in some cases,
autism.
So when a mother has
certain antibodies
to a variety of
bacteria and viruses,
and the pregnancy is
carried past 37 weeks,
those antibodies get
passed through the placenta
to that baby, and that
baby is protected.
Their immune system
is exactly the same
as their mother for the
first four to six months
of their life.
So the babies will
get constant contact
with the mother's immune system
and the mother's antibodies
in pregnancy, especially after
37 weeks, through breast milk,
through the vaginal birth canal.
Or even if a mother has had a
mastectomy and cannot nurse,
and is using donor breast milk,
you will get antibodies through
the donor breast milk, as well.
So all of those things
are a multifaceted way
for a baby to build
their own microbiome
and their own immune system.
And we know that the microbiome
is like our fingerprint.
Everybody is unique.
The window of time that is
most critical for building
the microbiome is
the first six months
of life, when the
baby is generally
getting only breast milk.
Ideally, we would
have a vaginal birth,
and then that baby would
be wrapped and bathed
in that in, what I refer
to as, vagina juice,
and stays that way
for a couple of weeks.
I mean, you know, we've moved
into this hypoallergenic
society where we scrub
our little babies,
and then inoculate them, and
give them all these things
that they don't need.
They need breast milk,
and they need to be held,
and they're designed that
way with big floppy heads,
and big eyes, and a cry.
And so they should be held,
and cared for, and stared
at for weeks, and
weeks, and weeks,
and there's tons of
clinical research
that shows that
that actually grows
the thymus, which is
the immune gland that
starts the immune system.
You know, the average
cough or sneeze
that mom or dad, you know,
will introduce to the baby
is only something that's
going to help that baby build
their immune system.
Once their immune system
has been activated,
it's kind of on high alert.
So that may be the time when
a baby gets their first cold.
First colds in
babies last 10 days.
And I remember when my
kid got his first cold,
and I was out of my head.
He coughed, he
sneezed, he leaked out
of every orifice in his face.
And, you know, what
I said to myself,
and what I now tell my
parents years later,
is you just trust the body
and you trust the process.
And you understand when
something is really wrong
and you need to seek a
higher level of care.
But, for the most
part, it is abundantly
miserable for the parent and not
memorable at all for the child.
But those things lay down
the immune system foundation
for what is natural
or real immunity.
>> Immunity, from a
homeopathic perspective,
is about recognizing
self from non self,
and this happens
throughout our lives,
not just initially when we're
developing our immune system.
But. first, as
infants, when we nurse,
and we're taking in
something foreign,
and then getting rid of what
isn't nutritious for us,
and then when we hit around
two, and we become very
conscious of me,
and mine, and no,
and we start creating those
boundaries between ourselves
and others.
And we continue, as we
get sick and get better,
to develop that immune system
and that awareness of what's me
and what's not me.
What's safe for me?
What's not safe for me?
Teenagers start to
go through it again
as they individuate, we
call it, and they start
becoming very aware of, I'm me.
I'm not you.
The things that you have
taught me and given me,
I'm going to reject in
hopes of finding myself.
So that's a huge step
towards immunity.
And then, even as adults, as we
create boundaries and determine
what's healthy for
me, what relationships
are healthy for me, how close
or far away do I want to get
from certain things in my life?
These are illustrations of
creating a healthy boundary
or healthy immunity.
So immunity is something that
we build throughout our lives.
It's not just delivered by
the end of a needle or a pill.
It's really something that
encompasses mental, physical,
emotional, all
parts of ourselves,
and continues to develop
throughout our lives.
>> I think the conventional
viewpoint would be that every
disease is bad, and you
want to avoid all diseases.
There are theories.
however, that
measles, for example,
is actually healthy for us, that
it exercises our immune system.
We run a fever, we
have an acute reaction
that our body goes
through quickly,
and we come through that.
And, oftentimes,
children are seen
to be healthier after that.
They maybe take those
next developmental steps.
Maybe, if they're due for some
teeth, those teeth come in.
And so, perhaps,
the same could be
said of other viral illnesses.
Like I said, when I was a child
I had measles, mumps, rubella,
and chickenpox.
The only one I remember
at all is mumps,
because I was trying to
eat an orange at school,
and I felt a twinge
in my salivary gland.
Other than that, I don't
even remember having them.
However, I still do have my
immunity against measles,
mumps, and rubella.
My blood, still to this
day, retains the immunity
to those infections.
So when I had my son,
through the placenta,
I had passed blood to him
that contained the immunity
to those infections.
So he was immune for the
first few months, at least,
of his life.
Those diseases, measles, mumps,
rubella, and chicken pox,
they used to be called
the normal diseases,
normal viral diseases
of childhood.
You would have them when
you were 5, 6, 7, 8, 9,
something like that.
It is really not
physiological to have
those infections as adults.
They can be more serious and
have a lot more side effects.
Because of having measles,
mumps, and rubella,
I was able to provide
my son some immunity.
>> Now, the situation has
changed with maternal immunity
and mothers who were born in
the vaccinated generation,
they do not have as much of
the robust maternal immunity
as mothers who were born at
the time when they still had
childhood diseases.
So this is the time when
it might make more sense
to be more protective
of young infants,
because you no longer have
that maternal immunity
to protect them.
But, on the other hand, to live
in fear, it's also not ideal.
And one could find ways of
going about mitigating the fear,
or mitigating the risk of
diseases, by doing research.
And you know when you've
done enough research is when
you no longer have that fear.
>> Why am I not afraid of
disease with my own children?
Well, it's been a journey.
So I was trained at
Dartmouth, pediatric residency
in California.
I really felt that
modern medicine
was the solution to just
about anything and everything.
You give all the vaccines.
We've got a drug
for this or that.
What I've come to appreciate
is that real health depends
on a healthy immune system,
getting all your nutrients,
and avoiding toxins.
Our bodies are
amazingly designed
to promote health, if we don't
interfere with the process
by putting in unnecessary
toxins or being nutritionally
deficient in some way.
>> I do remember having
mumps when I was about five,
and all I remember is that
my mom started dressing me up
to go to kindergarten
and, at some point,
she realized that
my neck is swollen.
So she just touched my neck,
and she started undressing me,
and told me I don't have to
go to kindergarten today.
So that was all my
memory about mumps.
Measles happened when
I was 12, and measles
was quite intense and a
very unpleasant experience.
So it started as the flu.
It was very intense as the flu,
maybe 10 times more intense
than the regular flu is, and it
was first diagnosed as the flu
the first time that we
called the doctor in.
It looked like a flu, so that
was that was the diagnosis.
But five days later,
a rash broke out,
and we called the doctor
again, and the doctor said, now
it's measles.
And everyone was really
happy that it's measles.
So nobody looks scared.
It was it went from being
a horrible flu to just
being measles.
And then I had one week of
rash, and then it resolved.
I do believe that their
recommendation was
to keep the child home
for quite a long time
after the experience
of measles in order
not to pick up secondary
bacterial infections.
It was in March or April, so
it was still very cold outside,
and so I stayed home from
school for about a month.
But it was convalescent
so I wasn't sick.
I was just convalescing
from my measles
and enjoying that
break from school.
And rubella happened when
I was about 15 or 16.
And I was actually going
through some testing,
flying to United
States to colleges,
and I would just
go to do the tests
while I was having rubella.
So it wasn't even stopping
me from pursuing my life
and going about my studies.
And the last one
was whooping cough.
Actually, no, whooping
cough preceded rubella,
so I think whopping cough
happened when I was about 14.
And, again, it
wasn't a big deal.
As far as symptoms
were concerned,
yes, the whooping cough
experience is unpleasant,
but there would be a long
time in between those whoops.
And I was expected to
go to competitions,
academic competitions,
compete for my school,
while I was having
a whooping cough.
So nobody was making any deal
out of these childhood diseases
I grew up in believing
in this theory,
and according to this theory,
you cannot have a disease once
you are vaccinated, because
you already have an immunologic
memory from that vaccine.
And, therefore, the
theory is that even one
shot of that vaccine is enough
to last a life a lifetime.
And then, later
on when I realized
that that wasn't
the case for me,
I started looking a
little bit deeper,
and I found out that
there is actually--
this is not a closed
chapter in immunology,
and there is actually dissent
within immunology itself,
within conventional
immunology, whether
immune immunologic
memory equals immunity
or it does not equal immunity.
And there are very
prominent immunologists
who speak against that theory.
And they actually
did experiments,
which are published,
that prove that it's not
immunologic memory that
gives you immunity.
I am aware that vaccination
doesn't equal protection
from disease for life.
At first, I thought
that my measles--
I got measles to
start with, plus
it was pretty severe, that it
was because my parents didn't
vaccinate for it.
But later, I realized
that was not the reason.
Another thing that
happened is, at some point,
I was speaking with a
medical doctor, my friend who
grew up in Israel, and we
started talking about measles.
And she said, oh, wasn't that
one of the childhood diseases
that was easiest to go through?
And my experience of measles
wasn't that, so I was thinking,
are you talking about
the same disease?
How can my measles be
so severe, and you're
saying that your measles was
the easiest disease to handle?
And that got me thinking, why
is it that in Africa children
have different
symptoms of measles
than what I had in Ukraine?
And a child who
grew up in Israel
would have a totally
different experience
of measles and
thinking about measles
as the easiest childhood
disease to go through?
So then I started of looking
at how the immune system deals
with infections.
What I realized is that
there are innate pathways
in the immune system
that are very much
dependent on certain nutrients.
For example, there
is antiviral pathway
that really depends
on vitamin A.
And if that pathway
is not working,
then you would have
predisposition to diarrhea,
because your mucosal immunity
in the gut is not working.
Also, you would have
a more severe measles,
or any viral infection
spread through the body.
You would also
have eye symptoms,
because the body will try to
pull vitamin A out of the eyes
to deal with immune
response to that virus.
And if you are starting
as vitamin A deficient,
you would have eye symptoms,
of which include redness,
and photo phobia,
such that children
even need to sit in a
dark room during measles.
Well, that wasn't
happening for me.
When I had my measles, I didn't
have to sit in a dark room.
I didn't have any eye symptoms.
What I had was very strong
respiratory symptoms, a very
strong cough, and when
I looked into what's
responsible for
respiratory symptoms,
so what vitamin deficiency
is responsible for that,
it's vitamin D deficiency.
That's why we are having
flu during winter months
when we are insufficient
on vitamin D.
And in Ukraine, we
had tons of food
which are rich in vitamin A.
We had grass fed butter, organ
meats, and we we're doing
that on a regular basis
as a traditional diet,
so children were never
vitamin A deficient in Ukraine
the way they are in Africa.
When you approach
immunology conventionally,
it might look like a very
complicated and boring science.
And that is because the way
it is presented to students
of immunology, to
medical doctors,
has nothing to do
with reality, really.
You cannot figure out
from studying the textbook
of immunology how to improve the
function of your immune system.
It's there.
It's functioning, in theory.
But, for some reason, in
reality, it's not functioning.
And doctors are not trained
from that textbook of immunology
on how to make it
function again.
Open mindedness is the
way to advance science,
and as soon as we close our
mind and we say something works
and that's the only way
that it works, and we
don't want to look any further,
that's the end of the journey.
It starts with a mindset.
It really starts
with whether you
want to believe that
there is a different way,
or that there is something
that you still don't know,
or you want to believe
that everything that's
in the textbook is all
that there is to know
and there is nothing
you can do beyond that.